knowledge-base/HANDOFF-CONTEXT.md, before:

# 🔁 Handoff Context: Knowledge Graph Integration Planning

**Session ID**: kb-20250106-1530
**Date**: 2026-01-06
**Status**: Phase 1 Complete - Planning Integration Phase
**VPS**: 72.60.204.156 - Bun + TypeScript + KB System Running

---

## 📦 Current State

### ✅ Completed (Phase 1)
- All 5 core files implemented
- 43/43 tests passing (100%)
- VPS deployment working
- Ingestion, query, and summarization functional

### 🔄 Pending Work (Phase 2+)

**Immediate Next Steps:**
1. Relationship extraction (currently stub - returns empty array)
2. Graph traversal implementation
3. MCP server for external access
4. GitHub webhook integration for auto-ingestion

---

## 🤖 Critical Question: Agent Integration Options

### How Do Agents Discover & Use This Knowledge System?

This is a **critical architectural decision** that affects how the system will be used. Here are the available options:

### Option 1: **Claude Code Skill Integration** (Recommended for Claude Code)

**How it works:**
- Create a skill file in `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
- Agents automatically discover it through skill's description field
- User or agent invokes via `/kb-query "search query"`

**Pros:**
- ✅ Native Claude Code integration
- ✅ Automatic discovery via skill YAML frontmatter
- ✅ Works with /execute skill orchestration
- ✅ Minimal setup required

**Cons:**
- ❌ Only works in Claude Code
- ❌ Requires manual skill invocation
- ❌ Not transparent to other tools

**Implementation:**
```yaml
# .claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md
---
name: kb-query
description: Search the project knowledge base for relevant code patterns, architecture decisions, and documentation. Use this when you need context about the codebase.
---

# /kb-query

Search the project's knowledge graph for:
- Code patterns and best practices
- Architecture decisions
- Related code and dependencies
- Documentation references

## Usage
\`\`\`
/kb-query "How is authentication implemented?"
/kb-query "What are the database schemas?"
\`\`\`
```

---

### Option 2: **MCP Server** (Universal Integration)

**How it works:**
- Deploy KB as an MCP server on VPS
- Claude Code (and other MCP clients) connect to it
- KB provides tools: `kb_search`, `kb_ingest`, `kb_stats`

**Pros:**
- ✅ Universal - works with any MCP client (Claude Code, Cline, Continue.dev, etc.)
- ✅ Standard protocol with growing ecosystem
- ✅ Can provide multiple tools
- ✅ Bi-directional (can push updates to client)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires MCP server deployment
- ❌ Network dependency (VPS must be accessible)
- ❌ More complex setup

**Architecture:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    VPS (72.60.204.156)                   │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │          MCP Server (Port 3000)                   │  │
│  │  Tools:                                          │  │
│  │  - kb_search(query, topK)                        │  │
│  │  - kb_ingest(documents)                          │  │
│  │  - kb_stats()                                    │  │
│  └──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                 │ SSE/WebSocket                         │
└─────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┘
                  │
                  │ MCP Protocol
                  │
┌─────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────┐
│              Claude Code (Local Machine)                │
│  - Connects to VPS MCP server                           │
│  - KB tools available in chat                           │
│  - Automatic context injection                          │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

### Option 3: **CLI Commands** (Universal, Simple)

**How it works:**
- Install KB CLI globally or via npx
- Agents can shell out: `!kb-query "search query"`
- Returns formatted text response

**Pros:**
- ✅ Works everywhere (CLI tools)
- ✅ Simple to implement
- ✅ Can be used in any editor

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires installation on each machine
- ❌ Shell execution has overhead
- ❌ Not integrated into agent's reasoning

**Implementation:**
```bash
# Install
npm install -g @yourorg/kb-cli

# Use in any context
kb-query "How does auth work?"
kb-ingest ./src --repo myproject
```

---

### Option 4: **REST API** (Maximum Flexibility)

**How it works:**
- Deploy KB as REST API on VPS
- Any agent can make HTTP requests
- Returns JSON with search results + summary

**Pros:**
- ✅ Universal - HTTP everywhere
- ✅ Language agnostic
- ✅ Can be wrapped by any tool

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires explicit API calls
- ❌ No automatic discovery
- ❌ Authentication/Security complexity

**API Design:**
```typescript
POST /api/v1/search
{
  "query": "How does auth work?",
  "topK": 5,
  "includeSummary": true
}

Response:
{
  "results": [...],
  "summary": {
    "text": "...",
    "citations": [...]
  }
}
```

---

### Option 5: **File-Based Integration** (Simplest, Local)

**How it works:**
- KB generates `.kb/context.md` file in project root
- Agents instructed to always read this file first
- File contains search results + summaries

**Pros:**
- ✅ Zero network dependency
- ✅ Works offline
- ✅ Universal (all agents can read files)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Stale data (must regenerate)
- ❌ No interactive querying
- ❌ Limited by file size

**Implementation:**
```bash
# Generate context file
kb-gen-context > .kb/context.md

# Agent prompt instruction
"Always read .kb/context.md before starting work"
```

---

### Option 6: **Hybrid: Skill + MCP** (Recommended Strategy)

**Combine approaches for maximum coverage:**

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    INTEGRATION STRATEGY                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                               │
│  Claude Code Environment:                                    │
│  ├─ /kb-query skill (primary) - local invocation            │
│  └─ MCP client (fallback) - for advanced features           │
│                                                               │
│  Other IDEs (Cursor, VS Code, etc.):                        │
│  ├─ MCP server connection                                    │
│  └─ CLI commands (fallback)                                  │
│                                                               │
│  CI/CD & Automation:                                         │
│  └─ REST API + CLI                                           │
│                                                               │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Recommended Implementation Order:**
1. **Phase 2A**: Create `/kb-query` skill for Claude Code (quick win)
2. **Phase 2B**: Deploy MCP server on VPS (universal access)
3. **Phase 2C**: Add CLI wrapper (for scripts/CI)
4. **Phase 2D**: REST API (for integrations)

---

## 🏗️ Resilience & Availability Planning

### Current Architecture (Single Point of Failure)

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         Single VPS (72.60.204.156)       │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐│
│  │ Qdrant + Ollama + KB API            ││
│  │ (ALL on one machine)                ││
│  └─────────────────────────────────────┘│
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
         ↑
         | Single point of failure
         |
    ┌────┴────┐
    │  Agents │
    └─────────┘
```

### Failure Scenarios & Mitigations

| Scenario | Impact | Mitigation | Priority |
|----------|--------|------------|----------|
| VPS down | No KB access | ✅ Local cache (LanceDB) - already designed | P0 |
| Ollama down | No embeddings/summary | ✅ Fallback to OpenAI | P0 |
| Qdrant down | No vector search | ⚠️ Local-only mode | P1 |
| Network outage | Cannot reach VPS | ✅ Local cache + offline mode | P0 |
| Data corruption | Lost knowledge | ⚠️ Backups + replication | P1 |

### Resilience Implementation Plan

**Phase 1: Local Fallback (Already Designed)**
- ✅ Local LanceDB cache
- ✅ Offline mode detection
- ✅ FallbackManager with multiple providers

**Phase 2: High Availability (Future)**
- ⏳ Multi-region deployment
- ⏳ Qdrant clustering
- ⏳ Backup Ollama instance

**Phase 3: Monitoring & Recovery**
- ⏳ Health checks
- ⏳ Auto-failover
- ⏳ Data backups

---

## 📊 Current System Capabilities

### What Works Today

✅ **Ingestion**
- Ingest documents with embeddings
- Store in Qdrant with metadata
- UUID-based point IDs

✅ **Query**
- Semantic search via embeddings
- MinScore filtering
- Evidence-based summarization with citations

✅ **Infrastructure**
- VPS deployment (Qdrant + Ollama + Bun)
- 100% test coverage
- TypeScript 0 errors

### What's Missing (TODO)

❌ **Relationship Extraction**
- Currently returns empty array
- Needs: Dependency parsing, code analysis

❌ **Graph Traversal**
- Basic traversal implemented
- Needs: Real relationship data

❌ **Agent Integration**
- No skill or MCP server yet
- Agents don't know about KB

❌ **Auto-Ingestion**
- No GitHub webhooks
- Manual ingestion only

---

## 🎯 Recommended Next Steps

### Immediate (This Week)

1. **Create `/kb-query` Skill** (2-3 hours)
   - File: `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
   - Implementation: Simple KB query
   - Benefit: Agents can immediately use KB

2. **Basic MCP Server** (4-6 hours)
   - Deploy on VPS port 3000
   - Implement 3 tools: search, ingest, stats
   - Test with Claude Code MCP client

3. **Test Integration** (1-2 hours)
   - Verify skill works in Claude Code
   - Verify MCP connection works
   - Document usage patterns

### Short-term (Next Sprint)

4. **Relationship Extraction** (8-12 hours)
   - Code dependency parsing
   - Import analysis
   - Store in Qdrant payloads

5. **Enhanced MCP Server** (4-6 hours)
   - Add graph traversal tool
   - Add relationship search
   - Add batch operations

6. **Monitoring** (4-6 hours)
   - Health check endpoint
   - Metrics dashboard
   - Error tracking

### Long-term (Future Phases)

7. **GitHub Integration**
   - Webhook receiver
   - Auto-ingestion on push
   - Incremental updates

8. **Multi-Region HA**
   - Backup VPS
   - Data replication
   - Failover logic

---

## 🤔 Decision Required: Integration Priority

**Question for Approval:**

Which integration approach should we implement first?

**Option A: Quick Win - `/kb-query` Skill Only**
- Time: 2-3 hours
- Works: Claude Code only
- Risk: Low

**Option B: Universal - MCP Server First**
- Time: 6-8 hours
- Works: All MCP-compatible tools
- Risk: Medium (network dependency)

**Option C: Complete - Skill + MCP**
- Time: 8-12 hours
- Works: All scenarios
- Risk: Medium (more complex)

**My Recommendation: Option C**
- Implement skill first (quick validation)
- Add MCP server (universal access)
- Test both thoroughly
- Document usage patterns

---

## 📝 Implementation Checklist

### Skill Integration
- [ ] Create `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
- [ ] Implement skill handler
- [ ] Test with Claude Code
- [ ] Document usage examples

### MCP Server
- [ ] Create `src/mcp/MCPServer.ts`
- [ ] Implement tools: search, ingest, stats
- [ ] Deploy on VPS (port 3000)
- [ ] Test MCP connection
- [ ] Add authentication (optional)

### Testing
- [ ] End-to-end integration tests
- [ ] Performance benchmarks
- [ ] Error handling validation

### Documentation
- [ ] Usage guide for agents
- [ ] Integration guide for developers
- [ ] API documentation (if MCP/REST)

---

**Status**: Ready for approval
**Next Action**: User to select integration approach
**Estimated Time**: 2-12 hours depending on approach

Commit message:

docs: Update Q4 Research with evidence-based review and corrected Phase 2-3 progress status

knowledge-base/HANDOFF-CONTEXT.md, after:

# 🔁 Handoff Context: Knowledge Graph Integration Planning

**Session ID**: kb-20250106-1530
**Date**: 2026-01-06
**Status**: Phase 1 Complete - Planning Integration Phase
**VPS**: 72.60.204.156 - Bun + TypeScript + KB System Running

---

## 📦 Current State

### ✅ Completed (Phase 1)
- All 5 core files implemented
- 43/43 tests passing (100%)
- VPS deployment working
- Ingestion, query, and summarization functional

### 🔄 Pending Work (Phase 2+)

**Immediate Next Steps:**
1. Relationship extraction (currently stub - returns empty array)
2. Graph traversal implementation
3. MCP server for external access
4. GitHub webhook integration for auto-ingestion

---

## 🤖 Critical Question: Agent Integration Options

### How Do Agents Discover & Use This Knowledge System?

This is a **critical architectural decision** that affects how the system will be used. Here are the available options:

### Option 1: **Claude Code Skill Integration** (Recommended for Claude Code)

**How it works:**
- Create a skill file in `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
- Agents automatically discover it through skill's description field
- User or agent invokes via `/kb-query "search query"`

**Pros:**
- ✅ Native Claude Code integration
- ✅ Automatic discovery via skill YAML frontmatter
- ✅ Works with /execute skill orchestration
- ✅ Minimal setup required

**Cons:**
- ❌ Only works in Claude Code
- ❌ Requires manual skill invocation
- ❌ Not transparent to other tools

**Implementation:**
```yaml
# .claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md
---
name: kb-query
description: Search the project knowledge base for relevant code patterns, architecture decisions, and documentation. Use this when you need context about the codebase.
---

# /kb-query

Search the project's knowledge graph for:
- Code patterns and best practices
- Architecture decisions
- Related code and dependencies
- Documentation references

## Usage
\`\`\`
/kb-query "How is authentication implemented?"
/kb-query "What are the database schemas?"
\`\`\`
```

---

### Option 2: **MCP Server** (Universal Integration)

**How it works:**
- Deploy KB as an MCP server on VPS
- Claude Code (and other MCP clients) connect to it
- KB provides tools: `kb_search`, `kb_ingest`, `kb_stats`

**Pros:**
- ✅ Universal - works with any MCP client (Claude Code, Cline, Continue.dev, etc.)
- ✅ Standard protocol with growing ecosystem
- ✅ Can provide multiple tools
- ✅ Bi-directional (can push updates to client)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires MCP server deployment
- ❌ Network dependency (VPS must be accessible)
- ❌ More complex setup

**Architecture:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    VPS (72.60.204.156)                   │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │          MCP Server (Port 3000)                   │  │
│  │  Tools:                                          │  │
│  │  - kb_search(query, topK)                        │  │
│  │  - kb_ingest(documents)                          │  │
│  │  - kb_stats()                                    │  │
│  └──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                 │ SSE/WebSocket                         │
└─────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┘
                  │
                  │ MCP Protocol
                  │
┌─────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────┐
│              Claude Code (Local Machine)                │
│  - Connects to VPS MCP server                           │
│  - KB tools available in chat                           │
│  - Automatic context injection                          │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

### Option 3: **CLI Commands** (Universal, Simple)

**How it works:**
- Install KB CLI globally or via npx
- Agents can shell out: `!kb-query "search query"`
- Returns formatted text response

**Pros:**
- ✅ Works everywhere (CLI tools)
- ✅ Simple to implement
- ✅ Can be used in any editor

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires installation on each machine
- ❌ Shell execution has overhead
- ❌ Not integrated into agent's reasoning

**Implementation:**
```bash
# Install
npm install -g @yourorg/kb-cli

# Use in any context
kb-query "How does auth work?"
kb-ingest ./src --repo myproject
```

---

### Option 4: **REST API** (Maximum Flexibility)

**How it works:**
- Deploy KB as REST API on VPS
- Any agent can make HTTP requests
- Returns JSON with search results + summary

**Pros:**
- ✅ Universal - HTTP everywhere
- ✅ Language agnostic
- ✅ Can be wrapped by any tool

**Cons:**
- ❌ Requires explicit API calls
- ❌ No automatic discovery
- ❌ Authentication/Security complexity

**API Design:**
```typescript
POST /api/v1/search
{
  "query": "How does auth work?",
  "topK": 5,
  "includeSummary": true
}

Response:
{
  "results": [...],
  "summary": {
    "text": "...",
    "citations": [...]
  }
}
```

---

### Option 5: **File-Based Integration** (Simplest, Local)

**How it works:**
- KB generates `.kb/context.md` file in project root
- Agents instructed to always read this file first
- File contains search results + summaries

**Pros:**
- ✅ Zero network dependency
- ✅ Works offline
- ✅ Universal (all agents can read files)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Stale data (must regenerate)
- ❌ No interactive querying
- ❌ Limited by file size

**Implementation:**
```bash
# Generate context file
kb-gen-context > .kb/context.md

# Agent prompt instruction
"Always read .kb/context.md before starting work"
```

---

### Option 6: **Hybrid: Skill + MCP** (Recommended Strategy)

**Combine approaches for maximum coverage:**

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    INTEGRATION STRATEGY                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                               │
│  Claude Code Environment:                                    │
│  ├─ /kb-query skill (primary) - local invocation            │
│  └─ MCP client (fallback) - for advanced features           │
│                                                               │
│  Other IDEs (Cursor, VS Code, etc.):                        │
│  ├─ MCP server connection                                    │
│  └─ CLI commands (fallback)                                  │
│                                                               │
│  CI/CD & Automation:                                         │
│  └─ REST API + CLI                                           │
│                                                               │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Recommended Implementation Order:**
1. **Phase 2A**: Create `/kb-query` skill for Claude Code (quick win)
2. **Phase 2B**: Deploy MCP server on VPS (universal access)
3. **Phase 2C**: Add CLI wrapper (for scripts/CI)
4. **Phase 2D**: REST API (for integrations)

---

## 🏗️ Resilience & Availability Planning

### Current Architecture (Single Point of Failure)

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         Single VPS (72.60.204.156)       │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐│
│  │ Qdrant + Ollama + KB API            ││
│  │ (ALL on one machine)                ││
│  └─────────────────────────────────────┘│
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
         ↑
         | Single point of failure
         |
    ┌────┴────┐
    │  Agents │
    └─────────┘
```

### Failure Scenarios & Mitigations

| Scenario | Impact | Mitigation | Priority |
|----------|--------|------------|----------|
| VPS down | No KB access | ✅ Local cache (LanceDB) - already designed | P0 |
| Ollama down | No embeddings/summary | ✅ Fallback to OpenAI | P0 |
| Qdrant down | No vector search | ⚠️ Local-only mode | P1 |
| Network outage | Cannot reach VPS | ✅ Local cache + offline mode | P0 |
| Data corruption | Lost knowledge | ⚠️ Backups + replication | P1 |

### Resilience Implementation Plan

**Phase 1: Local Fallback (Already Designed)**
- ✅ Local LanceDB cache
- ✅ Offline mode detection
- ✅ FallbackManager with multiple providers

**Phase 2: High Availability (Future)**
- ⏳ Multi-region deployment
- ⏳ Qdrant clustering
- ⏳ Backup Ollama instance

**Phase 3: Monitoring & Recovery**
- ⏳ Health checks
- ⏳ Auto-failover
- ⏳ Data backups

---

## 📊 Current System Capabilities

### What Works Today

✅ **Ingestion**
- Ingest documents with embeddings
- Store in Qdrant with metadata
- UUID-based point IDs

✅ **Query**
- Semantic search via embeddings
- MinScore filtering
- Evidence-based summarization with citations

✅ **Infrastructure**
- VPS deployment (Qdrant + Ollama + Bun)
- 100% test coverage
- TypeScript 0 errors

### What's Missing (TODO)

❌ **Relationship Extraction**
- Currently returns empty array
- Needs: Dependency parsing, code analysis

❌ **Graph Traversal**
- Basic traversal implemented
- Needs: Real relationship data

❌ **Agent Integration**
- No skill or MCP server yet
- Agents don't know about KB

❌ **Auto-Ingestion**
- No GitHub webhooks
- Manual ingestion only

---

## 🎯 Recommended Next Steps

### Immediate (This Week)

1. **Create `/kb-query` Skill** (2-3 hours)
   - File: `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
   - Implementation: Simple KB query
   - Benefit: Agents can immediately use KB

2. **Basic MCP Server** (4-6 hours)
   - Deploy on VPS port 3000
   - Implement 3 tools: search, ingest, stats
   - Test with Claude Code MCP client

3. **Test Integration** (1-2 hours)
   - Verify skill works in Claude Code
   - Verify MCP connection works
   - Document usage patterns

### Short-term (Next Sprint)

4. **Relationship Extraction** (8-12 hours)
   - Code dependency parsing
   - Import analysis
   - Store in Qdrant payloads

5. **Enhanced MCP Server** (4-6 hours)
   - Add graph traversal tool
   - Add relationship search
   - Add batch operations

6. **Monitoring** (4-6 hours)
   - Health check endpoint
   - Metrics dashboard
   - Error tracking

### Long-term (Future Phases)

7. **GitHub Integration**
   - Webhook receiver
   - Auto-ingestion on push
   - Incremental updates

8. **Multi-Region HA**
   - Backup VPS
   - Data replication
   - Failover logic

---

## ✅ DECISION MADE: Option A - `/kb-query` Skill

**User Rationale:** "if it's repeatable and reproducible for all claude code docs, I prefer Option A"

**Implementation Plan:**
1. Create `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md` with proper YAML frontmatter
2. Implement skill handler that queries Knowledge Base
3. Test with Claude Code to verify discovery and invocation
4. Document usage patterns

**Time Estimate:** 2-3 hours

**Scope:** Claude Code only (initially)
- Skill-based approach is repeatable across projects
- Leverages Claude Code's built-in skill discovery
- Simple, focused implementation
- Can be extended to MCP later if needed

---

## 📝 Implementation Checklist

### Skill Integration
- [ ] Create `.claude/skills/kb-query/SKILL.md`
- [ ] Implement skill handler
- [ ] Test with Claude Code
- [ ] Document usage examples

### MCP Server
- [ ] Create `src/mcp/MCPServer.ts`
- [ ] Implement tools: search, ingest, stats
- [ ] Deploy on VPS (port 3000)
- [ ] Test MCP connection
- [ ] Add authentication (optional)

### Testing
- [ ] End-to-end integration tests
- [ ] Performance benchmarks
- [ ] Error handling validation

### Documentation
- [ ] Usage guide for agents
- [ ] Integration guide for developers
- [ ] API documentation (if MCP/REST)

---

**Status**: Ready for approval
**Next Action**: User to select integration approach
**Estimated Time**: 2-12 hours depending on approach
